Hello, everyone. Charlie, Will, Eric, Sebastian, Gina, and Samuel. What a big group of people we
have here today. An awesome, awesome group. Thanks for being here, everyone. Good to be here.
Yeah, thanks so much for having us.
Thanks for having us.
Yeah. It's going to be super fun to have you on the show. I know there's so many people out there
that are dreaming of an open source project
or even working on open source and contributing to it.
But it's something they squeeze in the last hour of their day.
And at some point, all of you have made this amazing transition
to where there's enough support,
there's enough interest in what you all built
that becomes your full-time thing, right?
Which is, I know for many out there, living the dream.
So you all are living the dream.
Hopefully you feel that way.
But it's going to be really great to kind of just explore your projects.
How do you make that transition?
And, you know, what you're up to.
So we have Samuel Colvin on from Pydantic.
And he has the tightest schedule.
He's squeezing us in on a far-flung trip, work trip.
So let's go to you first, Samuel.
Just tell people a bit about who you are and what your project is to get started.
Yeah, I'm Samuel. I maintain Pydantic, which is a data validation library for Python that uses PyTense.
So those weird things you've seen after the colon in Python that mostly do nothing unless you run mypy or Pyright, Pydantic basically enforces them.
Almost exactly a year ago, I was sort of working on Pydantic full-time by then, but really spending my money to do so.
and a big American VC got in touch and fast forward I raised some money and started a company
yeah beginning of this year I hired now I'm with 10 people and actually as you mentioned I'm in
Istanbul at the moment with the whole team it turns out if you have a team with Americans,
Iranians and Russians that Istanbul is one of the few places that you can actually meet
efficiently so yeah we're having a really fun week in Istanbul mostly working together and then going
after dinner which is where we are at the moment i hope that's a good quick summary yeah absolutely
and what a cool experience that you get to hang out with all these people talking about your
project in istanbul i just had what is that i would just think the other thing i would add is
that one of the one of the best bits of it has been being able to hire friends of mine from open
source people who had i think all but two of the people here have contributed to fidantic before
we started the company, which is how I
hired the first, I think, six people
and then a few more. So one of
the best bits has been hiring other people
to come and work on open source
with me while still being able to
pay them properly. It's been really fun.
Yeah, awesome. I see a lot of people
shaking their head out there as well.
Just coincidentally, I recently
had Sydney Rumpel
on Who Works
With You, and she's such an
inspiration. That show is
not out yet, but has
already been done yet through the weird time shifting of podcasting. So it'll be out before
this, but it's not out yet. So anyway, very, very cool team you got there. All right. I guess we'll
go around the order of the video. Brady Bunch pictures here. So Charlie, you're up next.
Yeah, sure. Hey, so I'm Charlie. I am the author of Ruff, which is a Python linter
code formatter and code transformation tool written in Rust. I started working on Ruff
about a year ago, maybe like October of last year. Similar to Samuel, yeah.
Yeah. And I worked on it full time for a while, similar to Samuel, although probably not for quite
as long. I was working on it full time without any funding. And then similarly, I started to
around Ruff and really around the vision of trying to build high performance Python tools.
So take some of the things that make Ruff nice to use and popular and well-liked and try to apply
those principles to other parts of the Python tool chain. So yeah, we're a team of six
and we're fully remote. So no two of us live in the same, I guess a couple of us live in the same
country, but most of us, most of us live in different countries. and we span,
basically us central time to, I don't know what, we have one, we have one person in,
in India and one person in Minneapolis. And that kind of stretches like the full time zones of the
team. That's a good stretch. It's a good stretch there. Well, yeah, absolutely. Congratulations
and uh sebastian was i saw him saying nice things about it with fast api and so on yeah yeah i know
thanks a lot um it's it's just funny because i think i was saying before i started recording i
think when i came on talk python last time i think that might have been my first time ever on a
podcast so and it was to talk about ruff and so i was like oh wow people care about what i'm doing
um that's super cool um and and pydantic and fast api were some of the earliest um
adopters that people had heard of. So, they were like very early on in the, in the life cycle
and helped a lot with, you know, getting people to, to see rough and sort of care about
rough and, and, know that smart, smart people are using it. That's, that's awesome. Well, when
you visit talk Python or the courses website or others, it's, it's all roughified. I don't know
what the adjective of rough is,
but it's been rough.
It's whatever you want.
It's amazing.
It's been roughed up
and it works great.
It's really amazing.
That makes the code sound really bad.
But yeah, it's true.
It's like saying it's sick.
Like, oh, that was a sick trick they did.
It means good.
Yeah, that code is rough, man.
All right.
Will, is your code rough?
Who are you?
It's got some rough edges, certainly.
Welcome.
Yeah.
Hi.
I'm Will, I'm probably best known for a library called Rich, and Rich is a library for writing
formatted content in Terminal.
You can write tables and progress bars and syntax highlighted code, all sorts of things.
And then that became quite popular in the Python world.
I think there was a need for it.
And two years ago, I founded Textualize, which is a company which builds on Rich to produce
a library called Textual which allows you to build
user interfaces inside the terminal.
These are more like web interfaces and less like Cursors application.
Yeah, I was just thinking almost like Flexbox.
You can dock stuff to the side and that's part of the UI.
But it's pretty amazing what you've built.
Yeah.
I think it's pushed the terminal far beyond what many people
thought the terminal should be doing.
It's been very cool. It's been a process of discovery.
It's kind of strange.
You've got technology that's been around for decades
and still discovering things that they can do,
which people haven't tried before.
So, yeah, it's been a lot of fun.
And it's been great to work with a small team of developers.
We've got a small core here in Edinburgh, Scotland,
and we've got one developer in Portugal.
So, yeah, it's been great, and I love the reception
and I love what people are building with it.
Yeah, it's so many people are interested in using rich and there's a ton of plugins, right?
There's like rich click and there's pytest rich and all these things like, well, whatever we're doing, it should also have what you've built, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
I love to see that.
I love to see the ecosystem building.
Our adjective is richified.
Richified.
Okay.
Yeah.
That's rich.
My code is rich.
Okay.
Richified.
Got it.
I love it.
We all have adjectives that we've got to put on things.
Yeah.
I'm a big fan of you and your team's work, by the way.
I mean, I'm sure you hear it all the time, but you build awesome stuff.
Cheers.
I appreciate it.
Yeah, indeed.
We all are.
Eric, welcome.
You and I are coming in somewhat local here out of Portland, not Istanbul.
I'm actually out in Bend at the moment.
Are you in Bend?
Okay.
I absolutely love Bend.
Yeah.
So lots of mountains and whatnot.
but yeah, so my, my background in Eric Holscher, folks probably know me from
kind of the read the docs ecosystem.
I feel like I've been doing this for a while compared to everyone else here.
the project actually started in 2010, which is kind of amazing.
And then we actually built the, started the company around it in 2014.
So coming up next year, that'll be 10 years.
and so, yeah, and we're all, bootstrapped, so we haven't done
any venture capital.
It's all been kind of just build, built up the open source and then kind of
turned it into a company on top of that.
we kind of have a business model of doing paid for private hosting, you know, companies
as well as, advertising on open source.
And we spun out a kind of a separate business called ethical ads that we built kind of to
basically make, you know, better advertising on the internet, not doing any of the creepy
tracking stuff.
So I mean, read the docs is so critical to the open source space, not just Python, but
especially Python.
Yeah.
And then, yeah, I mean, so awesome work on that and then just, you know, good job on
the, the ad stuff as well.
the tendency of the whole ad space is to be super creepy and just like how much can we resell and
how much can we buy to mix in to like create these shadow profiles and it's not a good social trend
it's it's not good for people and it's not really necessary right like if i want to you know i've
sponsored ads on read the docs or had run ads on read the docs before and i mean we had a flask
course and let's just you know run that ad on flask instead of like let's see if we can track
somebody through Instagram over to Facebook, over to whatever.
Yeah, exactly.
We call it newspaper advertising.
And it's been really cool with the advances of ML, like the content targeting has gotten
pretty good.
Right.
So it's definitely a lot easier technically these days to kind of do that content matching.
But yeah, I think in terms of the kind of open source, maybe the way that I'm a little different
than other folks here is we're actually running something more akin to a service.
So read the docs, all the code is open source, but a lot of the usage is open source projects
using our hosted service.
We do obviously ship a lot of code, probably our Sphinx theme is, is probably the most
kind of well-known actual software that people are running a little bit similar to the folks
here, the kind of sidebar on the left.
And, and yeah, so I think that's kind of the background is, yeah, we have a little
bit of everything.
but yeah, it's a little more akin to something like a SaaS app, I would say, but the code
is all open source.
We do get a contribution in that way as well.
Yeah.
Awesome.
You know, it sounds a little similar to what textualize is working towards as well hosting.
I mean, it's more hosting people's apps than hosting people's apps.
Yeah, no, I mean...
Not terribly different.
You know, paying for services is a classic open source monetization strategy, right?
Like you have some way to kind of build the monetization on top.
Yeah, it's like what you build is great, but it's kind of hard for me to run.
Could you just do that?
Like, yeah, sure, we can do that.
Sebastian, always good to see you.
Welcome back.
Thank you very much for having me.
Hello, everyone.
I'm Sebastian Ramirez or Tiangelo.
I created this little tool for building web APIs that is called FastAPI,
and it has been growing quite a bit.
People have liked it, fortunately.
And, like, yeah, that's it.
I'm probably the only one that hasn't built a company here, I guess.
Okay, baby.
Okay, there are two of us.
Nice.
I want to hear that.
Okay, so this year I have been able to work full-time on open source
because Sequoia Capital, the VC firm,
started this open source fellowship.
And I am the first fellow,
so I am kind of the test trial of the program.
So I get just to work full time on open source.
And that's how I've been able to just, yeah,
release a bunch of stuff in FastAPI
and the ecosystem, like the other libraries.
FastAPI, SQL model, Hyper, and a couple of other things.
But yeah, that's pretty much it.
Yeah, awesome.
So, well, FastAPI is definitely the poster child for modern Python on the web, you know,
and Samuel's work obviously is central to that as well, right, with Pydantic being such a
core element there.
So, very awesome.
Yeah, and like, I mean, FastAPI is built on top of like great open source tools and their
needs.
So, Pydantic does all the data validation, serialization, documentation, and on the other
side starlet does all the web parts uh so yeah it's like unlike you know like it's a very close
how do you call it like uh close friendship between all the projects by dancing starlet
ubicorn fast api like you know like we actually know each by this point we actually know each other
in person like the current maintainer of starlet and ubicorn works for the pydantic company and he's
like the top FastAPI expert right now.
Like, you know, like it's very nice because it helps the dynamism of like building stuff.
It's great.
Yeah, I imagine a lot of people don't realize the interconnections between these different
projects that are at play here.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's definitely super fun.
Absolutely.
And then it's worth saying, we in Finantic use FastAPI,
as well as contributing to the libraries that build it,
we also use FastAPI for the services that we're building.
So we're like consumers, both directly and indirectly,
of the things that we maintain in open source.
So yeah, and chat quite often to Sebastian, so it's awesome.
It's turtles all the way down, basically.
Exactly.
Gina, also awesome to have you back.
Willkommen.
Yeah, very happy to be back.
That's really, really great to be here now,
I think, for the second time.
So at a third, if we call Python bites.
So yeah, my name is Gina and I'm probably, yeah, I don't know if I'm, if I'm that well
known throughout the Python community, but I'm quite well known in the 3d printing community
for having created Octoprint, which is the snappy web interface for you 3d printer.
And the server part of that is all written in Python.
And I started a project back in 2012 when I got my first 3d printer as your regular pet
project on the side after hours vacation, blah, blah, blah. In 2014, I got hired by a 3D printing
company to work on it full time. And in 2016, that company ran out of money. And I suddenly found
myself with a full fledged full grown open source project, and no funding whatsoever. So I tried
this whole crowdfunding stuff with Patreon. And that is pretty much how I've been working ever
since so i'm self-employed under german law i'm a freelancer um and yeah all my income comes from
people who just sent me money for working on october did you say since 2016 since 2016 yeah
wow okay cool so full-time since 2014 and uh self-employed and crowdfunded since 2016
so it's been a while
that's awesome
I also went full time on all my stuff
here at 2016 although it's
technically not open source it talks
a whole lot about open source stuff so
awesome but it's been
a while congratulations thank you
I'm still surprised it works to be honest
I'm waiting every day that it
stops working and yeah actually
this year it came a bit close and then I put
out like a blog post basically along the lines
of you know like the income is going
this, but the usage numbers are going that. So something is amiss here and we need to talk. And
then the community rallied and stuff fixed itself again. So that's pretty amazing.
That's really awesome. Congratulations. It's easy for people to just go, oh, it's free. And there's
some people supporting it and just kind of assume that things are taken care of. But yeah. Yeah.
Really good. Really good. Yeah. You have a ton of supporters on GitHub sponsors as well, right?
Yeah, actually, I've diversified over the years.
In the beginning, it was only Patreon and PayPal,
and then I started adding new payment platforms and options
because people prefer to be able to use the stuff that they know,
and some people don't like Patreon,
some people don't like GitHub sponsors and stuff,
and so you just give them the options to choose
whatever they feel comfortable with,
and this increases the likelihood that they actually will go through
with throwing something in your head, so to speak.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
That's my feeling.
I don't know.
I think that GitHub sponsors
has been really positive for open source.
I think it's made it pretty easy
to just check a box.
They already have your credit card potentially
and you just want to give a little support
instead of, you know,
one-time PayPal donation here
that you forget about after once
and all that.
Yeah.
Before we move on here,
there's a funny comment,
nice comment out.
Kanishk says,
this group, look at all of you.
You guys are the Avengers of Python open source,
which is superheroes.
I love it. It's somewhat actually true, it seems.
Okay. The next thing I want to ask is
a little bit of an origin story.
Just what projects did you try and they didn't really get traction?
Then how do you think that your project got traction here?
I know Samuel, you might vanish any minute,
so you're up first on this one.
That's a really interesting.
I've built a number of things in open source.
I started something last week.
I opened source on Friday that has got more stars over the last three days,
or I guess week now,
as the first project I started ARQ'd has over, I think, coming up on six years.
So, I mean, that's front end,
and front end gets a lot more traction than, like, queuing an RPC does.
But, yeah, I don't know how, like,
obviously there were some things I played with back then that never took off,
But yeah, it was this, like, I think I was in the right time, right place, the Titans.
They'd obviously been around in Python for a long time.
But back in 2017, when I started Pydantic, their usage was growing really fast.
And I think there were lots of people like me who found it kind of frustrating that they
were there and didn't do anything.
So yeah, I think being the right time, right place was super valuable for me.
And obviously, like, great projects like FastAPI, adopting Pydantic, it made a big difference.
But I don't know.
What's weird, if you look at the download chart, it's like, who is this infection point?
at the beginning of 2021.
So then we had like 5 million downloads a month
and since then there's been kind of
almost exactly linear growth
to now 125 million downloads a month.
So something weird happened in 2021.
Long after the project started, I don't know.
Yeah, I think it was right place, right time.
And that's frustration was the starting point.
On that note, I'm going to have to rush guys.
But it's great to see everyone.
And I'm sure I'll meet you all at a conference soon.
Bye-bye.
Yeah, thanks for dropping in.
Good to see you.
All right. Charlie, keep going around the circle here.
Yeah, of course. Yeah. You know, it's interesting because I like this.
Rough is really my first time being a maintainer and like publishing open.
Like I've been a consumer of open source, right. For my whole career,
but I was never really, I guess, like a creator or a publisher or a maintainer of open source.
And it's, you know, around the time that I started working on Ruff, I was working on like a couple
different projects and they all, I was kind of trying to figure out what I wanted to do next.
I'd left my job recently and Ruff was kind of motivated by a lot of the experiences I had at
my job where I was like maintaining a large pipeline. Did you leave your job with the intent
of going to work on rough are we just like i'm gonna leave and then i'm gonna figure something
out it's funny i love i love my job i left my job with the intent of starting a company um
but i did not think it would be rough and rough was like this distracting side project that i was
working on while i was like i was working with a friend and we were like trying to figure out
like the venn diagram of interests of like what should we what are we willing to work on full
time together what makes sense given like our interests and um and then in all my free time i
was like i just want to work on developer tools and like i worked on i built i built rough where
i started building rough i i worked on like um yeah i worked on a lot of different not a lot but
like i did was working on a couple different projects i did like um a sort of cicd thing where
you like write docker files and um like ci files in typescript and they like transpile down and i was
I was like, oh, I think that has a lot of cool ideas.
I worked on like, it was pretty early in a lot of the LLM stuff.
I worked on like a code base wide refactoring tool where you like give it examples of like before and after.
And then it tries to find examples.
It was like a copilot for your entire code base.
It didn't work that well at scale, but it was like a cool idea.
So I was like working on the stuff that was all open source.
Maybe it could have been a timing thing.
Like maybe today that would be all the.
Yeah, it's also like, you know, it's also an effort thing.
I guess like I put a lot more into Ruff and it was interesting because I kept viewing Ruff as like, you know, it was probably open source.
But at that point, I don't think I had launched, like launched it.
And I kept viewing it as like, like I said, like a little bit of a distraction.
And my friend was like, you know, I think you should really like push to like release this because like if you think it's like interesting, then like other people will probably think it's interesting.
And he was the person that really like motivated me to actually like see it through to doing the release.
And then I did the release and like a lot of people were actually interested in it.
So that kind of gave me like the energy to like really start working on it full time and just kind of see where it went.
And it was really like projects like Pynantic and like Sebastian started like commenting on issues and stuff.
And I was like, wow, like real serious projects are looking at this like crazy tool.
and let me just see
I'm just going to do whatever it takes to make it
a feasible choice for them
and just started cranking
through all the issues and all the things that we were
missing so
it escalated pretty quickly I think
Did it surprise you?
Oh yes
absolutely
I mean like
I was convinced that
like
I was convinced
that I had faced like
problem around tooling as like our code base got large in my last company and that there was an
opportunity to like build um like better more performant tooling i wasn't sure how much i
genuinely wasn't sure like how widely that message would resonate with people um and so um i don't
know it's like a little bit of luck right like sometimes you work on great projects and then like
they go nowhere and like just no one happens to see it and then sometimes you work on a good thing
and like it does go somewhere and so there are certain things that are within your control certain
aren't. I feel like, I feel like we did, I did a good job of like communicating the project and
like why it was interesting and why it was exciting. But I also feel like I got a little bit lucky that
it just like gravitated towards the right people and got attention in the right ways.
Sure. Also maybe that black had existed, which is a little ironic because black kind of solves
a real similar problem, but like people were, okay, we embrace the idea of the thing that rough does
really well, you know, to use rough in that sense. Yeah. I mean, we have a little bit,
i mean it gets back to this like we have a little bit of like a um like a second mover advantage
right we're like exactly there's a lot of existing tools that people use already and like a lot of
those practices like the idea of using a format or the idea of running code mods like the idea of
using a linter and like the knowledge of like what kinds of rules are valuable and like what kinds of
analysis we can do um like all this stuff existed and that was part of um part of the story really
was I was like, these tools are great and I get a lot of value out of them, but I want them to be
like easier and faster. And so, yeah, there's definitely a strong timing thing. I think like,
I think Rust too, this is maybe like a little bit more specific to what we're doing, but like,
you know, I think like the intersection between Python and Rust has gotten early, I guess the
interoperability between them and sort of the ecosystem around it has just grown a lot. I mean,
It's still, I would say, pretty early, but it's matured and grown a lot over the past
few years.
Even just the fact that at my last company, we started to introduce Rust and we started
to move some of our core systems into Rust and expose them over PIO3.
The fact that that existed and the fact that I was exposed to that, that's all just pure
chance.
Otherwise, I never would have thought to do this.
Yeah.
Very cool.
Well, congrats.
Well, well-deserved.
Thanks.
All using Ruff as we have.
said is excellent. Will, Rich is awesome. Why do you think it took off? Did you try stuff before?
Yeah. I tried a lot of stuff before GitHub. Coding has always been my hobby. I'd do it for work and
come home and work on a hobby project and it just seemed natural to want to share it.
Pre GitHub, I would just put stuff on my blog and get some feedback from it there. I quite
that um and yeah i have a number of open source projects pretty rich um i had a bb code parsing
library um i had a chess library um i had a web uh toolkit um so yeah when rich came along it was um
another hobby project something to keep me entertained why is this terminal so boring
come on see what yeah well i'd always you know i'd always use the terminal and it always struggled
when you've got a page of white text on black background and you're trying to pick out an IP
address from somewhere and you know I'd always wished oh I wish it would just format it and
colorize it for me I know this is possible but it doesn't happen so then yeah I just I started it
and it came together quite well when I released it it was like boom the stars just started accumulating
I got lots of feedback. It was very exciting. And I kept building on it. It was kind of like
issue-driven development. So people would just ask for something and go ahead and
add that and implement it. And it grew from there and it became really large.
I did actually prior to Rich, I had a library called PyFile System.
And this is kind of like a wrapper to file systems. So you can have the same interface for
FTP server as a hard drive for a zip file SV bucket and that got some use in the community
it wasn't enormous but that taught me a lot about building open source you know managing
feedback and issues etc so that was a great experience when I started working on Rich
and I was very surprised actually how successful it became I remember the first time I realized
that this is bigger than just a hobby project
is when someone told me off for violating Semver,
I released a clear breaking change
because I thought, nobody's using that yet.
But they were.
So the next day I got told off quite appropriately.
And then I thought, okay, I'll have to take this more seriously.
If people are using this in their day job,
they can't just have someone who's just like
throwing new bits of code and changing functionality.
they had to had to treat it like it was an actual my day job yeah well everyone on the call here
probably has a little bit of nervousness about like if i break this there are a lot of people
that depend on this thing yeah and it's so different like it just changes so much or like
the early like when you're talking about the issue-driven development thing too i was like
i just remember that phase of like rough where it was like anyone who cared all about the project
all I wanted to do is like make them happy right and I was like oh wow that seems like a cool idea
like let's definitely do it and I would just like you know it was the point in time where I could
like fix the bug cut a release the same day and then like their thing is fixed and then it's like
okay great now we have a relationship like thanks for using my thing like blah blah blah I just
think like but that's changed so much right because then I went through the same experiences
of like I ship a release with a breaking change that I didn't really document a lot of people get
have said and then you realize okay i actually have some more responsibility now yeah these days
it's more like trying to find the balance between saying no to stuff that you then have to end up
maintaining and not like disappointing people too much because you say no or uh things like that and
then trying to to keep this whole um interaction with people nice even though you don't want to do
stuff they want you to do.
Yeah, I have this now.
Because you know it's better for the project.
Yeah, PRs are like cake
or puppies.
If it's a simple bug fix, that's like cake.
You'd like, thank you.
I enjoyed that cake.
Then move on. But some PRs are like a puppy.
It's like, it's terrific.
You like puppies, but you've got to feed them
and clean up after them.
Why am I standing in the rain
with this puppy on a Friday night?
How did I get here?
Yeah, so sometimes you have to say...
Collecting the puppies, poof.
Yeah, exactly.
Sometimes you say, thank you, but I just can't look after another puppy right now.
And that's a difficult thing to come to terms with,
when the project gets a bit more mature.
Because previously, you're accepting all the puppies.
But then you have to start saying no to puppies.
And Rich definitely got there because it accumulated...
Will, do you hate puppies? Come on, that's a pretty hard stance.
I'm kind of a cat person, to be honest with you.
But yeah, I mean, you have to say no eventually.
Yeah.
I think this is where plugins always kind of like take the center stage, right?
You're like, just, oh, that sounds like a great idea for you to maintain external to my library.
That was exactly my approach to the whole situation.
Yep.
Have fun.
But also the probability of some little change breaking someone's code and like being considered
a breaking change grows as the project grows in usage.
And like, you know, like at some point it's like almost any change
will end up breaking someone in very unexpected ways
because they are doing something really, really weird,
but you know, like someone is doing it.
So like it becomes more and more difficult to know,
like is this a breaking change or not?
Like no one should be using this variable here or this parameter,
but like, you know, there's someone out there doing that.
So I don't know, I feel defining what is actually a breaking change and what is a strict sember gets more difficult as things grow.
Yeah, I don't know.
One of the things I like that the Django project did was kind of basically only things that are documented are supported, basically.
That was kind of the line they drew, and I thought that was a pretty good way to draw it.
But yeah, that never actually works.
That doesn't make people happy.
It just gives you plausible deniability.
Don't yell at me.
It's not my fault.
Yeah, I think adding a formal versioning policy
is one of the best things that we did.
Because for a long time, Ruff was just,
we only used patch releases.
So we got to like 0, 0, like 285 or something.
And we had basically no guarantees
about what would or wouldn't change across releases.
And as the project got more and more popular,
that started to cause more and more problems.
And so Zany, someone on our team, like when they joined, one of the first few things they
did was like create an actual formal versioning policy.
And we added like preview behavior.
So like you can opt similar to what Black has and kind of opt into like breaking or more
experimental changes.
And so now we have like clear expectations around what it means to like bump a minor release,
et cetera, et cetera.
And like that has made our lives a lot easier, like actually having clear expectations around
that that are communicated and respected.
But it's the kind of thing that you just don't think about at all until it, at least I didn't, until the Ratchet got bigger.
Yeah.
Some people's code runs things like FastAPI or Octoprint or whatever.
Your stuff rewrites people's code.
Yeah.
But it doesn't run at runtime.
I don't know.
I actually think it's easier.
Yeah.
Indeed.
I mean, it's like, it's funny you talk about the plugins thing. Cause like,
I've actually very intentionally taken the opposite approach, which is we have like almost no public API
because like the only public API is the CLI and like, we don't expose our API in any other way.
And that's because like, we know we're going to change like everything internally, like pretty
dramatically. And so we wanted to have like full control over that without having to worry about
breaking people's stuff yet.
But it's starting to become more of a problem
because more and more people want to use it as a library
in different ways.
But it's-- I don't know.
It's sort of a counterintuitive way
to make our lives easier as maintainers
was not expose any public API apart from the CLI.
Yeah, yeah.
Very interesting.
Fully, funny sort of anecdote.
I'm rewriting a lot of the documentation for SQL model
because I want to have examples.
Right now I have examples that are compatible with Python 3.7 and about,
but actually 3.6 and about.
But I want to have also the syntax for 3.9 and 3.10.
In 3.10 you can have like the unions using the vertical bar and these things,
and I want to have examples for each one of those.
So the approach I did was to write a script that will automatically update
each one of the files by calling rough as a soup process.
So that's the API.
And then like, you know, like doing all that stuff.
Like, yeah, like another, another.
Yeah, great.
That's
in the end, unfortunately.
Yeah, they'll find the underscore functions
you've tried to dissuade them from using
and all the things, yeah.
Eric, what's the origin story for Read the Docs
and what'd you try and how do you think it caught on?
Yeah, so, I mean, this was kind of way back in the day,
but yeah, I kind of got started writing Django plugins,
you know, apropos to the conversation.
You know, I was working at the Lawrence Journal World
where Django came from
and it was kind of early in my career.
And I was just kind of getting excited about open source and blogging and just basically built a few of these kind of testing related open source projects.
And then that was kind of where I got started with open source.
And then basically it was the classic scratch scratch on itch thing, right?
Like it's like, I have a bunch of open source projects.
I want to write documentation.
How do I solve that problem?
And back in the day, that was a much harder problem to solve, right?
It was basically just like build a zip file and upload it to packages.python.org.
If folks remember that one.
or was it packages or whatever the docs, there was a docs hosting on PyPI basically.
And yeah, basically just wanted to kind of build a better version of that, that
integrated with GitHub.
I feel like webhooks were like the cool new thing back in 2010, you know?
And so that was really kind of the insight, right?
It's like, let's build this kind of like CI, CD workflow on top of webhooks.
And actually did build a kind of a version of that the previous year around kind of like
code quality stuff.
So it actually ran kind of like a linter and built a website on commit and had a similar kind of workflow, right?
Where it like gave you a grade and did all this kind of stuff, which is like 2009.
And yeah, that didn't really catch on at all.
But then I think Read the Docs, just we built it.
And then I was using it for my own projects.
And I actually had the need to kind of maintain it and keep it updated.
And then I think people just kind of grew naturally, you know, gave some conference talks, that kind of stuff.
But I think it just solved a problem that people had.
And that's always going to be the best way to grow a thing.
Yeah, absolutely.
Awesome.
What's Read the Docs written in?
Is it Django?
Yep.
Yeah, it's all Django and Python.
Right on.
Funny coincidence.
I went to college in Lawrence at the University of Kansas.
Oh, nice.
I was right there, right at the heart of Django, but I moved off to grad school a couple years before all that happened.
So I missed the excitement.
I grew up in Virginia and everyone's like, you're going to Kansas? You graduated school? How are you going there? Everybody thought it was the weirdest decision, but yeah, I really do think ending up in that Python and Django ecosystem has been pretty transformative to my life.
Lawrence is a pretty cool little town, actually, of all the places. Sebastian, how did you come about this crazy idea to put types into our web apps? Python, that's dynamic. It doesn't have types. What are you doing?
Yeah, I don't know. So crazy.
It's so fun to see Michael Darson in the chat.
They maintain our URL D3 and the Python security developer in Resilience,
just chatting along with us.
He probably has had to deal with so much stuff as us.
Yeah, I'm sure.
So some of the first things that I did in open source
were actually Docker images for deploying Flask
because I was working with Flask.
And deploying Flask was difficult,
and I needed to be able to combine Nginx with UWSGI
and a bunch of things.
And they all had their own custom configuration files,
and it was so difficult.
I didn't like doing that,
and then I just had to study how to do that stuff.
And then after going through all that,
I wanted to save everyone else's time doing that.
So it was like, let's just put a Docker image with this
and a lot of documentation of how this Docker image works
and how you can use it with some sensible defaults.
So, you know, it was just like a weird contraption.
That was it.
But it actually grew and got like a few stars,
like a bunch of stars.
For me, it was a lot, you know, like 100 stars.
Oh my gosh, I'm an open source developer.
And then like at some point,
it had like a thousand stars or something like that.
I was so happy about that.
And at some point, it was kind of the de facto standard
for doing Flask in Docker.
that was the first thing that I did.
I ended up with FastAPI.
I was avoiding building FastAPI for a long while,
and I was trying all the other frameworks
and all the other tools.
I was convinced that there was something
that would do the things that I wanted.
I just had to find it.
And as I was trying different frameworks,
also in different languages,
I was extending the list of things that I wanted to have
and also the list of things that I wanted not to have.
For example, I didn't want to...
That takes you farther and farther away from any framework.
Exactly.
Having one that will tick all the boxes.
So it was like, ah.
But then I realized, I really like
this thing of having types, as in types
because you get out of completion and inline errors.
And this is so cool.
It's so cool to be able to have this.
I want to have this in Python.
And then Python added type annotations.
And it was like, this is great.
How do I use them?
There's no way to use them with the current frameworks.
So at some point, I actually found the right framework.
It was called API Star by the same author of Django REST framework.
And it was just missing some authentication stuff.
I said, like, okay, I'm going to contribute to the other stuff.
When I was about to jump into the code, he said, I have to deprecate this.
I will go focus full on Starlet.
And then he went to build Starlet.
This is Tom Christie, which is super prolific and an amazing open source person in general.
And then at that point is when I said, like, ah, I just have to try it.
Let's just do it.
So I'm just going to try to build something that will be kind of a spiritual successor to API Star, built on top of Starlet.
So I was, you know, like I was actually narrating all the learnings from Flask, Django, Django REST framework and all the ecosystem and just like bringing all those ideas together.
At least that was my intention. And then I wanted to have a bit of better type annotations.
So I saw that Pydantic was using standard type of notation.
So people wouldn't have to learn this, like, you know,
from past API for special string or something like that.
Just instead of that, just use pure string.
So I wanted to have something based on standards,
like OpenAPI, JSON schema, and all that stuff.
And based on standard Python,
and to have like the simplest syntax possible
and to, you know, like give the best developer experience possible
while, you know, like not adding like any additional steps
for developers to build something that by default will have all the best practices built in.
That was the intention.
And I was just like trying to solve it for the things that I was working on.
I was supposed to be doing AI and machine learning and stuff,
but like I had to stop for a bit to solve APIs and I got stuck in APIs.
And that's how I ended up with FastAPI.
Oh, I think you made a pretty decent choice.
It seems like FastAPI is doing all right.
Yeah.
Yeah, I just saw you.
Much better than what I ever had expected.
Yeah, I know. Congratulations.
Well, it's also deserved.
But I also just saw an X, I don't know, a post on X Twitter,
however you address these things,
where you said you showed a graph
where the number of GitHub stars for FastAPI just passed Flask.
And I have a lot of respect for Flask and the Palette team
and David Lord and all those folks.
But awesome that your stuff has taken off so much.
That's really cool.
It's super cool. It's amazing.
And Flask was one of the big inspirations for FastAPI.
And I've been able to be at this point.
It's crazy.
Like, yeah, I still can't get over it.
Yeah, super cool.
Super cool to be able to build all this
and to keep building more stuff.
So yeah, super nice.
Yeah, one final comment before we move on to Octoprint.
But one of the things I kind of see you doing in the world
is you're like the combiner.
you're like, oh, we've got this cool stuff with Pydantic
and Starlet.
And how can we combine it in this way
to make this, you know, and Swagger.
And like, similarly with SQL model, you're like,
well, Pydantic is cool, but
SQLAlchemy is kind of cool, but it could be
more better, you know, like it'd be better, right?
So anyway, good job.
Yeah, and also like Typer, that is the library
for building command line applications.
It just click with the type annotations,
the same ideas from Pydantic, and now with, you know,
like integrated building support for reach.
So it's like also picking Will's work, trying just to put a bunch of things together.
I'm just, you know, like I'm just making cocktails everywhere.
Yes, exactly.
It's more than that, but there is a lot of value in combining things in a smart way, an accessible way.
Yeah.
Yeah, awesome.
All right, Gina, you told us a little bit about the origin story, but like what did you try before?
And then I have a follow-up question I think is unique to your project.
I wouldn't necessarily say that I tried anything before because the whole thing was completely unintentional.
I mean, I basically bought myself a 3D printer in late 2012.
I wanted to be able to put it in my spare bathroom and monitor it from afar,
because back then this thing was tying up my PC.
You had to constantly keep it connected so it could operate and that for hours and hours.
And it made noises and it produced fumes.
And I just wanted it out of my office.
And to be able to play games on my PC again, instead of having it, yeah, basically communicate constantly with a 3D printer.
And so I bought myself a Raspberry Pi and I was looking online for something to be able to just put on this Pi and attach to the printer and throw a Wi-Fi dongle in.
Because back then the Pi didn't have Wi-Fi built in.
And throw that in the spare bathroom, but there wasn't anything.
So over the course of my Christmas break in 2012, I sat down and changed that.
And this is basically the origin story of Octoprint.
I just wanted to scratch my own itch.
I wanted to put my printer in my spare bathroom.
This is all.
And apparently a lot of people had the same problem because I just, you know,
like how we like to do these things.
We build something that we think might be interesting.
We throw it up on GitHub and go just like here, go nuts, enjoy,
have fun with that.
And I suddenly started getting emails from all around the world.
Like, hey, I have this in this printer.
Can you also make it work with that?
And so this escalated and I went like, oh, someone is using it.
course i'm going to add this support and of course i'm going to add this feature and it just grew and
grew and grew and grew and apparently i just hit a nerve so this was utterly unplanned this was
never my intention at all and uh i just wanted to solve my own problem and have continued to solve
my own problems and the problems of other people ever since uh before octoprint i actually was also
quite active in a little project called doku wiki where i was developing some plugins for that and
And I even did open source before I knew what open source was with some PHP scripts when I was 18 or so that I threw up on my website.
But yeah, Octoprint was like it took over my life.
It just was an accident, a happy little accident, maybe.
Yeah. How do you decide, OK, this is a job for me rather than just a thing you worked on?
Yeah, so the thing is, by mid-2013,
I went to 80% on my regular day job.
I used to be a software architect/consultant
with big corporation, Java World, all that enterprise stuff.
And to be able to dedicate one day per week fully
to Octoprint plus, of course, the weekends
and the after hours and the vacations and all of that.
And that still didn't suffice anymore by 2014.
And I noticed that it was impacting my health.
It was impacting my relationships.
And that was actually quite perfect timing, really,
when this company that hired me initially approached me and said,
hey, do you want to maybe fly out to us and we'll chat?
And if you like all of that, what we have to propose,
then we can just do that.
And this is how it then continued to go from 2014 until 2016.
And yeah, it was never my intention to become self-employed.
I'm a quite risk-averse person, actually.
So when this point came where I was like, OK, either I find a way to keep funding this or I have to really drop it because it was way too big by then to be kept as a pet project without being utterly, utterly unhealthy.
Yeah, I decided to jump into the cold water and have been trying to keep up at the surface ever since, basically.
So, yeah, all of that really completely unplanned.
- Yeah, cool.
What an adventure, huh?
- Indeed, yeah.
And the good thing is even if people don't understand
what open source is or what code is,
I always have quite a topic at parties.
So that is fun because yeah, people give you money
for something they can get for free, what?
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, if you're not familiar with open source,
then it definitely is a weird thing to say.
- Absolutely, it was tricky to find a tax consultant
who understands the concept, so.
Yeah, I can imagine.
Oh, yeah, that's interesting.
I'm sure.
All right.
I was very recently, I was like, what do you do?
What is your day?
Oh, I'm a software developer.
So you work for a company.
I built a software that is free for others to use.
And who's paying you?
A company that pays money to companies to build companies.
So you're building a company.
No.
You know, like it was a long conversation.
They got bored and left.
That was it.
This doesn't make any sense.
I've just taken to say I'm a software developer
and I work with 3D printers
and then people usually stop asking questions
because 3D printers are this mysterious thing
that no one understands.
Anyhow, usually at least.
And then, yeah.
Unless they say, oh, 3D printers.
And then I say, yeah, do you know 3D printers?
And they go, yeah, yeah, I have one.
And then I can say, oh, do you know Octoprint?
Yes.
oh yeah, I made that.
And then, oh, but yeah, it's tricky to explain to people.
I'm sometimes not even sure my parents understand
what I do.
I'm sure that my parents don't understand what I do.
But that's okay.
I'm sure they're still proud of you anyway.
It's fine.
Yeah, my family are proud of you.
I would like to just maybe,
we're getting a little short on time.
You're coming up to the end of our Avengers meeting.
let's close it out with this go around one more time let y'all or maybe just as a group kind of
chime in on this you know speaking to the people out there listening who want to start an open
source project or want to contribute to open source or somehow kind of get involved in some
other ways what would you what would you do different if you started now right many of you
have worked on this for a long time you've had a lot of experience like if somebody said
well, the world is, you know, somehow the memory has been erased from the fact that
rough or rich or octopred or whatever existed, you know, to start over,
what would you do different or, or the same? I would use FastAPI.
Yeah. Good, good use of a time machine there. Everybody, like I've had multiple conversations
over the years where people are like, why don't you use this library? I'm like, oh, it didn't exist.
Exactly, yeah, that is the problem, right?
And when you actually have a plugin system,
then swapping out stuff like that can become very tricky.
Like, yeah.
So--
But yeah.
Absolutely.
I don't know.
When I get asked what to work on, what to study, what to focus,
how to get into open source, or almost any of those questions,
I always say that the main advice I give is just to focus on a problem that is important to you.
More than, you know, like innovation, market disruption or whatever, just like focus on a problem that is actually important to you.
Hopefully that is important to others as well.
And if it's not a problem that affects you directly, hopefully it affects someone that is very close to you.
So you can get like a very tight feedback loop of what you are building.
And then try to solve it and then use that as the guide of what to do, what to learn, what to focus on, what to do.
In many cases, it's just learning a framework that is already there.
You know, like why would I go and build a system to control 3D printers instead of just like learning how to use Optoprint.
In many cases, solving the problem is just like using the tool that is already there.
But then in some cases, you end up figuring out that there's no tool and you just have to build it.
There's actually no linter and formatter that can be super fast, so you can run it every time you just hit save.
So then you just have to build it in Rust and create Rust.
There's always this thing that you are trying to solve that is just not solved there yet, and that is what gives you the best value and the best outcome.
In many cases, it can be just contributing to another open source project or building something new.
But the thing is, for me, it's just focusing on a problem that is important.
That is what has worked for me, at least.
Yeah, good advice.
I would add to that that you really shouldn't try to...
I mean, you need to be really passionate about the thing as well, right?
It needs to be something that is really something you're into,
something that you will want to spend a lot of time on
that is actually not your working hours and such,
because otherwise the whole
jog until this becomes
anything viable, anything big enough
to support you in any kind of way
even if it's just being able to
I don't know, drink an additional coffee per week
or something, that will be
a quite long slog and
a lot of work and a lot
of blood and sweat and tears and so you really
need to be into this so that you
want to do that. If you are just in that
for the end goal of, I don't know
becoming rich
probably not work.
then, I got rich.
Okay.
That was unintentional.
Then, then this will not work out.
I, yeah.
Like the, you need to focus on the path to the goal and not the goal, you know, like
a lot of people try to reach for the end goal before they actually are willing to actually
walk the path.
get this along. I happen to be in the GitHub star program and I've had a lot of people ask me,
how do you become a GitHub star? And that is just the wrong question to ask. That's just the same
as it is. How do you become an open source maintainer of a popular project? Like you just have to
do whatever you are interested in. You have to do work and you have to be passionate about your work.
And then maybe if you hit the right nerve, then that will happen. And maybe it won't. I mean,
yeah and i think it's very interesting that none of us had like a career path to where we are now
we didn't set out to be where we are now it just feels like um we kind of followed our own intuition
and it worked out which means it's very difficult when someone asks me well how do you become an
open source developer how do you start a company it's like i'm not quite sure um i can tell you my
path to there um but it's very hard for me to articulate to someone else um i think there's a
lot of luck involved as well right it's like you have to do all this stuff and then roll this dice
if it gets a six then you can be successful yeah there's an element of luck but it's kind of like
a luck you make for yourself um and it might take you to some you know some somewhere else or it
might not but as long as you're passionate about it and you enjoy it then great things will happen
I think. Well, also, Will and Charlie, you both took some specific time on your own money to really
level up what you're working on, which is pretty brave, right? Like, not a lot of people would say,
I'm just going to spend my savings to work on this project and see if I can make it go. So
you've earned some of that through taking that chance and putting that time and effort, I think.
For me, that didn't last way long, because after 15 months, I was living on
get on sponsorship and then GCs came along and then there was like cash and everything changed.
Then your world changed and you had to learn a whole new set of skills I'm sure.
Yeah, and then I had a job and responsibilities.
I do feel really lucky that, like I said, this is my first time being a maintainer and it was very
clear to me quickly that like for rough to have the pace of development and like the scope that
it has it like had to be a full-time thing and like that that was pretty obvious to me quickly
and i just i have a lot of respect for people who have been maintainers for longer periods of time
and in a way where it's not their full-time job or they have to do it on the side i think i haven't
really been in that position um but it's already clear to me that that takes like a lot of dedication
and commitment so i'm just i feel very lucky that i get to work on open source full-time i know it's
not all entirely luck, right? Like you increase your luck surface area and then opportunities
come your way. But like, but I do think it's just very fortunate position that like these
kinds of opportunities do exist because maintaining popular stuff is a lot. It's a lot. I mean,
it's, it's, there are privileges that come with it a hundred percent, but I mean, yeah,
it's a ton, it's a, it's a lot of work and a lot of stress and a lot of responsibility.
Well, and you don't necessarily have to start your own right away.
You don't necessarily have to start your own either.
You could contribute to a really popular one and kind of get into the scene.
And, you know, like Eric, that sounds a little bit like your story.
Like you were in the Django scene and then spun off from that what you guys are doing, right?
Yeah, yeah, definitely.
And, you know, part of an open source community and definitely kind of going to PyCon and just kind of being surrounded by those people.
Because that was always the, it's very lonely work just to have an inbox of GitHub issues and then no inbox thank yous, you know.
and like going to conferences and that kind of stuff was really where you feel the appreciation
and you really kind of actually feel the value that you're providing as well as just the stress
of the things you're breaking. Totally agree with that. Absolutely. The conferences are great to
really feel the appreciation rather than just the... They'll say thank you and then they'll give you
a bug report, but at least thank you. While I'm talking to you, there is this...
could I just show you this one thing we're doing that's not working right oh gosh I do think an
interesting observation for me has been like a year ago I didn't really know anyone in Python
open source like at all um and like I was a user of Python in my day job every day but like I was
not interacting with Python and in a year um yeah now like Sebastian we've interacted a bunch like
there's just a lot of people that I've come to know um and think of as like friends so I think
they're really um you know especially if you're interested in getting involved and like putting
in work i really don't think there are significant barriers um and like you get out of it what you
put in so um i think uh i've been very impressed with just how welcoming and friendly the community
has been especially other maintainers yeah absolutely talk to a lot of people who show
up at pycon and they're like i was really nervous to come here or i feel like it didn't fit in and
they're you know just had such a great experience and i said well did you feel out it was me i
That was my first PyCon this year.
I'd never been to a Python conference.
And we did it up at such an amazing party.
That's true.
Above the Benihana.
That was interesting.
All right, guys.
Well, I think we are pretty much out of time.
Anyone want to have some final thoughts for listeners before we wrap it up?
Go on, build some cool stuff.
Who's brave enough?
How can I maintain it today?
Yes. Give cake, not puppies. Let's leave it with that. Give cake, not puppies.
And be really careful before you start a popular source project. It might take over your life.
If you want this, great. But if not, then...
Yeah. Careful what you wish for. You might get it.
All right. Gina, Sebastian, Eric, Will, Charlie, thank you all for being on the show. This has
a ton of fun. Thank you very much for having us. It's been an honor to be with these amazing people.
Thank you. I agree. Honestly, I had a blast just like hearing everyone's stories because I hadn't
heard any of those before. So thanks to everyone else. And thanks, Michael. Yeah, you bet. Bye, all.
Bye.